dadṛśire kila tatkṣaṇamakṣata-
stanitajṛmbhitakampitadiktaṭā: |
suṣamayā bhavadaṅgatulāṃ gatā
vrajapadopari vāridharāstvayā ||1||
dadṛśire kila	were seen indeed
tat-kṣaṇam-	(at) that moment
akṣata-stanita-	continuously roaring
jṛmbhita-kampita-	(and) spreading (and) causing to tremble
dik-taṭā:	the quarters to their ends
suṣamayā	in their brilliance
bhavat-aṅga-tulāṃ	Thy form in resemblance
gatā:	attaining
vrajapada-upari	above the land of Vraja
vāridharā:-tvayā	rain clouds by Thee (were seen)
At that moment, indeed, above the land of Vraja, were seen by Thee massive rain clouds continuously roaring and spreading. They caused all the quarters to tremble and they resembled Thy form in their brilliance.
vipulakarakamiśraistoyadhārānipātai-
rdiśidiśi paśupānāṃ maṇḍale daṇḍyamāne |
kupitaharikṛtānna: pāhi pāhīti teṣāṃ
vacanamajita śrṛṇvan mā bibhītetyabhāṇī: ||2||
vipula-karak-miśrai:-	huge hail stones accompanied by
toya-dhārā-nipātai:-	torrential rain fall
diśi-diśi	in all directions
paśupānāṃ maṇḍale	(when) the cowherds' groups
daṇḍẏamāne	were being tormented
kupita-	(from) angered
hari-kṛtāt-	Indra's actions
na: pāhi pāhi-	save, save us
iti teṣāṃ vacanam-	thus their words
ajita śrṛṇavan	O Invincible One! Hearing
mā vibhīta-	do not be afraid
iti-abhāṇī:	thus (Thou) said
There was torrential rain in all directions accompanied by huge enormous hail stones. The group of cowherds were tormented by the wrathful action of Indra. They all cried and prayed to be protected. O Invincible One! Hearing their laments , Thou asked them not to fear.
kula iha khalu gotro daivataṃ gotraśatro-
rvihatimiha sa rundhyāt ko nu va: saṃśayo'smin |
iti sahasitavādī deva govarddhanādriṃ
tvaritamudamumūlo mūlato bāladorbhyām ||3||
kula iha	(for) the clan here
khalu gotra: daivataṃ	indeed the mountain is the deity
gotra-śatro:-	the mountain enemy's
vihitam-ih	attack here
sa rundhyāt	he will resist
ka: nu va: saṃśaya:-	what indeed is your doubt
asmin iti	in this, thus
sahasita-vādī	with a smile saying
deva	O Lord!
govarddhana-adrim	the Govardhana mountain
tvaritam-	quickly
udamumūla: mūlata:	uprooted from the roots
bāla-dorbhyām	with (Thy) two tender hands
Here, for our clan, the mountain is the deity. Indra is the enemy of mountains. This mountain, Govardhan, will resist Indra's attack. Indeed what is your doubt in this?' Thou said so with a smile. O Lord! Assuring them, Thou quickly uprooted the Govardhana mountain with Thy two tender arms.
tadanu girivarasya proddhṛtasyāsya tāvat
sikatilamṛdudeśe dūrato vāritāpe |
parikaraparimiśrān dhenugopānadhastā-
dupanidadhadadhatthā hastapadmena śailam ||4||
tadanu girivarasya	thereafter of (this) mountain
proddhṛtasya-	(which) was lifted up
asya tāvat	this then
sikatila-mṛdu-deśe	on the soft sand bed
dūrata: vārita-āpe	which till far away was protected from water
parikara-parimiśrān	household articles, along with
dhenu-gopān-	cows and cowherds
adhastāt-	underneath
upanidadhat-	keeping
adhatthā:	(Thou) held aloft
hasta-padmena	with one lotus like arm
śailam	the mountain
Then Thou held aloft the lifted up mountain with Thy lotus like arm. The soft sand bed of the mountain was well protected from the rain water. The cows and cowherds all gathered under the uplifted mountain along with their belongings and were also well protected.
bhavati vidhṛtaśaile bālikābhirvayasyai-
rapi vihitavilāsaṃ kelilāpādilole |
savidhamilitadhenūrekahastena kaṇḍū-
yati sati paśupālāstoṣamaiṣanta sarve ||5||
bhavati	(when) Thou
vidhṛta-śaile	were holding the mountain
bālikābhi:	with the girls and
vayasyai:-api	with the boys of Thy age group also
vihita-vilāsaṃ	with enthusiasm
keli-lāpa-ādi-lole	in playful conversation etc engaging
savidha-milita-dhenū:-	near Thee gathered cows
eka-hastena	with one hand
kaṇḍūyati sati	caressing
paśupālā:-	the cowherds
toṣam-aiṣanta	satisfaction achieved
sarve	all of them
As Thou were holding the mountain, Thou enthusiastically engaged the girls and boys of Thy age group in playful conversation. The cows gathered around Thee and Thou caressed them with one hand. The cowherds were all very satisfied and delighted.
atimahān girireṣa tu vāmake
karasaroruhi taṃ dharate ciram |
kimidamadbhutamadribalaṃ nviti
tvadavalokibhirākathi gopakai: ||6||
atimahān	very big
giri:-eṣa	mountain this (is)
tu vāmake	however in the left
kara-saroruhi	hand, lotus like
taṃ dharate ciram	this (mountain) (he) is holding for long
kim-idam-	what this
adbhutam-	wonder
adri-balaṃ	(or) mountain's power
nu-iti	indeed (is it) thus
tvat-avalokibhi:-	by Thy onlookers
ākathi gopakai:	was said by the cowherds
This mountain is so huge. Yet he is holding it in his left hand which is tender like a lotus stalk, for long. What a marvel! Is it that it is the power of the mountain to have lifted itself up?' The Gopas who were Thy onlookers commented thus.
ahaha dhārṣṭyamamuṣya vaṭorgiriṃ
vyathitabāhurasāvavaropayet |
iti haristvayi baddhavigarhaṇo
divasasaptakamugramavarṣayat ||7||
ahaha dhārṣṭyam-	Oh! Arrogance
amuṣya vaṭo:-	of this small boy
girim vyathita-bāhu:-	the mountain (with) pained hands
asau-avaropayet	this (mountain) will place back
iti hari:-tvayi	thus Indra in Thee
baddha-vigarhaṇa:	full of contempt
divasa-saptakam-	for seven days
ugram-avarṣayat	heavily rained
Oh! The arrogance of this small boy! When his hands pain by the weight of the mountain, he will put it back in place.' Saying so Indra who was full of contempt for Thee poured rain heavily for seven days.
acalati tvayi deva padāt padaṃ
galitasarvajale ca ghanotkare |
apahṛte marutā marutāṃ pati-
stvadabhiśaṅkitadhī: samupādravat ||8||
acalati tvayi	(when) did not move Thou
deva	O Lord!
padāt padaṃ	from Thy place, (even) one step
galita-sarva-jale	(and when) were exhausted all the waters
ca ghanotkare	and the clouds
apahṛte marutā	(and when they) were dispersed by the winds
marutāṃ pati:	the head of the gods Indra
tvat-abhiśaṅkita-dhī:	(about) Thee (having) a doubtful mind
samupādravat	fled
Thou had not stirred one step from Thy place. All the clouds were drained and exhausted of their waters. They were drifted away and scattered by the winds. Noticing all this, the head of the gods, Indra was scared of Thy might and fled.
śamamupeyuṣi varṣabhare tadā
paśupadhenukule ca vinirgate |
bhuvi vibho samupāhitabhūdhara:
pramuditai: paśupai: parirebhiṣe ||9||
śamam-upeyuṣi	subsiding (having) reached
varṣabhare tadā	the heavy rain then
paśupa-dhenu-kule	the cowherds and the cows
ca vinirgate	had come out (from under the mountain)
bhuvi vibho	on the ground O Lord!
samupāhita-bhūdhara:	(Thee who) had placed the mountain
pramuditai: paśupai:	by the overjoyed cowherds
parirebhiṣe	were embraced
The heavy rain had then subsided and the cows and cowherds had come out from under the mountain. O Lord! Thou then replaced the mountain on the earth and were embraced by the overjoyed cowherds.
dharaṇimeva purā dhṛtavānasi
kṣitidharoddharaṇe tava ka: śrama: |
iti nutastridaśai: kamalāpate
gurupurālaya pālaya māṃ gadāt ||10||
dharaṇim-eva purā	earth also itself, long ago
dhṛtavānasi	had lifted up (Thou)
kṣitidhara-uddharaṇe	in mountain lifting up
tava ka: śrama:	Thy what effort
iti nuta:-tridaśai:	thus praised by the gods
kamalāpate	O Consort of Laxmi!
gurupurālaya	O Resident of Guruvaayur!
pālaya māṃ gadāt	save me from ailments
O Consort of Laxmi! The gods praised Thee saying that long ago (in the incarnation of a Boar) Thou had lifted up the whole earth itself. Lifting up the mountain was not much of an effort for Thee. O Resident of Guruvaayur! Save me from ailments.